so
so we have another project that is
from am dark who's going to be talking
to you here live with us um a.m is an
artist and game maker designing radical
tools for social intervention still in
the class war now in the pandemic he's
in the combination class war and
pandemic assistant professor of
performance play and design digital arts
and new media and critical race and
ethnic studies at uc santa cruz dark
also directs the other lab an
interdisciplinary intersectional
feminist research space for experimental
games and new media
dark's recent work includes yay or nay a
kanye west-themed game about black
culture fairly intelligent tech a
speculative algorithm about inclusive
data and the open source afro hair
library a 3d model database for black
hairstyles and textures
dark holds a ba in design and an mfa in
media arts both from ucla he has
completed residencies with laboratory
nyu game center the open data institute
and the frank rachi studio for creative
inquiry at carnegie mellon additionally
his work has been shown internationally
and featured in a variety of
publications including kill screen
advice and npr
and with that i'm so excited to welcome
am
hi
yeah perfectly perfectly um thank you
for that wonderful introduction i tend
to go over and talk so i appreciate you
you doing that for me um yeah uh hello
everyone i can't see you but i believe
you're out there in the ether and i'm uh
so glad to be here today um so yeah i'm
gonna be talking about my project uh the
open source afro afrohair library
and you know it's an interesting talk to
give because um
it's a work in progress and for me the
way that i approach my practice is
usually i'm dealing with some kind of
you know large systemic issue that also
impacts me and on a personal level and
um i tend to think about these problems
and then my uh through the process of
art making i'm trying to solve them so
because this is a work in progress i'm
going to be asking a lot of questions i
don't know that i have answers
um but i certainly will be showing some
approaches and um i really welcome
uh you know just opening up this
conversation so we can all sort of
tackle these issues together um yeah so
um
i'll just briefly repeat that the open
source afrohair library is a queer
feminist anti-racist anti-capitalist
database for 3d models of black hair
textures and styles
and uh for a little background um a few
years prior so last year i i got um in
2020 i got a
a hellman fellowship award uh to do some
of this work and i actually have been
thinking about this problem for a while
because back in 2017 i was doing a
residency with laboratory in spokane and
i was creating a vr piece called in
passing and it was all about um how we
navigate public space based on our
perceived identities and our
self-identifications and the rift that
exists between the two and so i was
using these sort of personal
testimonials and these narratives
but i was keeping things anonymous so i
needed to create these 3d models that
were representative of like physically
representative of the communities i was
you know um collaborating with um you
know but didn't exactly represent or
look like that wasn't the same likeness
so i was um you know using these
different like the 3d modeling platforms
because i'm not a 3d modeler i was like
basically using these character creators
i felt like i was really like hacking it
like everybody looked really different
it was looking really good um until i
got to the hair i had you know black
characters and i didn't have
any black hair really and so um i
started to go on these 3d asset
warehouses
um so i could get more variety for my
characters and i was really
taken aback by what i saw um
and so basically and i'll show some
examples of this but i i realized
immediately that even searching for
black hair i was running into these like
social cultural issues
um
so i want to talk a little bit about
just the idea of search and how search
algorithms work and i'm definitely
building off of the work of sophia noble
in 2018 she released the book algorithms
oppression of oppression which really um
brought to the fore this idea of the
populist algorithm and the problem with
that
um i believe it was in 2009 she was um i
believe she was caretaking some uh black
relatives and she was looking for
content for them to engage with so she
does a google search for black girls and
instead of finding these you know
pictures of innocence she's finding you
know pornographic results so she repeats
the process with latina girls and asian
girls and you know compared to white
girls we're getting completely different
results when you look for white girls
you know you're seeing what you would
expect from such an innocuous term
and so this really got me thinking about
how you know because our search
algorithms are designed to
serve a user the most relevant
information as quickly as possible that
you know relevance becomes determined by
popularity right so the more people who
click on a result then the higher that
result ranks on a page and so what this
does is it creates a structure where the
majority of users get to define cultural
meaning and relevance for terms like
black girl or in my case for black hair
and this is something that i found
repeated when i went to these 3d 3d
asset marketplaces
so going back to like terms
the first thing that i thought to do of
course when i go to to this marketplace
i go into their little search bar and
i'm looking for
black hair because black hair that's
that's that's what it is
um but i quickly realized that black was
not a um cultural identifier and so if
you look at like one uh this page of
results um i think it's like a a little
over a third of these are actually just
like not people at all it's just animals
so it's like fur is being coated as hair
so we've got a horse we've got a few
rats we've got interestingly enough a
hairless
white cat
uh we've got a cow
um and then you see some images um
of blackness but then okay so here's a
black person apparently but then they're
bald so the hair is not a component
um and then you have of course like
black being used as a description of
color right so just um the hair the hair
color is black it's not has nothing to
do with the texture or the culture
and the this result is actually um these
are recent so we'll see more animals um
and you can recreate this i think i did
this like a week ago or something like
that so they're um
uh this is basically what you get when
you search right now
oh what happened there
oh sorry i have a
there's a little bit of a delay on my
screen
okay so um and we do see even in these
results a couple that are like getting
in the realm of what i'm looking for
okay here's some black hair here's some
black hair like in the way that i mean
and we've got this character back here
um
so
once i saw that there was an issue with
black hair i started to think about like
okay well what
you know how does someone who's not
black think about blackness so that i
can sort of find it and so i think i
tried kinky hair and um i started to try
i realized i started trying things like
like african-american hair
even though i'm not really looking for
african-american like i'm looking for
hair i'm not looking for like nation
states and i'm not
looking for ethnicities but i'm trying
to get into the head of like this you
know
hypothetical non-black person who
presumably you know built these kinds of
sites so i finally settled on afro hair
and it's a moment i think i'm just so
brilliant like yes afro that'll get it
because afro's also a hairstyle
and so here are the results for afro
hair
and so we're getting closer right like
this is you know we're seeing more hair
almost the entire page is like black
people
um
but let's look a little bit more closely
at the results
so i'm bringing back this image again
because i want to point out that even
though this is a hairstyle that like is
within the vein of things that i'm
looking for it also comes with this like
kind of hyper-sexualized what i what i
read as like an anime teen body
and so even though i'm looking for hair
i'm like why do i have to look at this
like naked young woman
like who is this for
um
and then we see things like this where
this is uh afro hair messy
this is not afro hair to me this looks
like someone stuck their finger in an
electrical socket and you know like this
to me is not authentic representation i
don't know anybody's afro who looks like
this
um
and then again you can see the features
that you know uh to me this is the
chocolate dip barbie where it's like
brown skin but features that aren't
typically um uh black again you see with
this character so this is clearly like a
white woman and i don't know what's
going on that is also not an afro
one of my favorites blackmail afrohead
joe
i don't even know where to begin with
joe but you can see too that because i'm
having to use the term afro then i'm
getting like literal afros because again
searching for black hair doesn't um
you know it's not related as a cultural
identifier
so here's one uh and i like this model
because you know this is a pretty
sophisticated rendering of a black woman
with pretty typical black features but
then the hair
um it kind of looks like she has this
short cropped afro based on the textures
that are used but then she's got this
sort of bun ponytail thing and again not
accurate you know black people we have
hair when you smooth it into a ponytail
it's smooth right you wouldn't have this
sort of close crop shave and then like a
ponytail so again it's not accurate and
it's certainly not authentic
and then when we get into higher quality
models right like and i say higher
quality in terms of like the the um
sculpt sophistication
um we still get into this caricature we
have this character who's definitely
supposed to be coded as like some you
know uh in prison name is bubba we've
got the brutalist background the gold
tooth and like the sort of menacing
exaggerated features
so we're getting into the realm of uh
racial caricature
um and we can also see this again with
the uh this pregnant couple um here
again let's take a look at her hair and
by the way this is for afro hair this
isn't searching for people this is just
afro hair so we see this weird afro
that's a mullet we see these cornrows
but then it's like i don't know if
people remember rugrats the like cynthia
doll where it's like it's like bald and
then there's cornrows it makes no sense
um
yeah so here's some of the
representation we have so we have an
instance of like maybe the ideal this
black woman's hair i love it i love this
model of everything about it
but
it sits next to these depictions that i
don't want to see that can be harmful
and damaging especially thinking you
know back to the idea of the the black
girl the actual black girls who maybe
want to get into making games or 3d work
and then in order to see themselves they
also have to see these other kinds of
depictions of how you know the dominant
group views them
and then looking at this model more
closely she's really stunning i love her
she's beautiful
she's also six hundred dollars so not
exactly accessible and also brings up
some some other issues that i have with
these kinds of
um
so again i felt like
it was already an issue when i had to
search for blackness right like how do i
see myself not just what is my
self-conception but actually like how do
i find myself
in this space of black virtuality on
these sites like i have to get into you
know du bois's concept of the double
consciousness right and i feel like i
was performing double consciousness just
by going through the process of
searching
but then seeing the results also kind of
externalizes it and makes it you know
turns into this like material this
digital material
and it just started a lot of um
thoughts in me it got me thinking about
okay how do i
if i'm going to create my own database
what does it look like to decolonize
that design process not just the results
but the actual experience of moving
through
a platform like this
what is the distinction between
caretaking and gatekeeping so again
when i'm creating the open source afro
hair library
you know it's meant to be open source
it's meant to be open it's meant for
people to be able to use these models
and um
but also i you know i don't want to
create a proprietary relationship to
blackness i don't want to possess
blackness
but coming from a culture that is
historically you know culturally
exploited
what is my responsibility to caretake
and steward um that culture right um
and then thinking about all of that i
thought okay how can i build a resource
of refusal and i'll i'm still unpacking
what that means but i'll get into in a
sec
so this brings me back to this idea of
like really focusing on the platform
right like how if i'm going to
if i'm going to make this this database
how can i do something differently
number one
how do i construct a resource if i don't
actually want you to find what you're
looking for right if i'm trying to push
back against the populist search
algorithm
and to give you an example some more
examples this is some of what people are
looking for this is what's being made
and this is what you can find um now
some of these uh databases have heard
about my project and have started to do
some work but this is these are the
images i'm showing you now are from my
original search
not my original search but my uh
research in 2019 so still only a couple
of years ago
we have a black mammy figure
uh we have
minstrels
we have a black woman who has an
authentic hairstyle and i believe it's a
3d scan so she's got braids similar to
mine but then she's spread eagle
completely naked and her wrists and her
neck are bound with rope
and then there's a lot of this sort of
thing where it's this generic tribal
primitive black person and the
completely nondescript but it's like
there's some grass through an animal
print and like they're black now even
though this person has no black features
and then this sort of vaguely menacing
phase i mean it's really comical here
because it's very goofy but you know the
intention is that it's supposed to be
this threatening savage character
um so you know basically it's easier to
find minstrels and mammies on these
sites than it is to find a twist out or
individuals or a nice fade
so why don't i want to give you what
you're looking for it's because what
you're looking for might be racist
and then this is the other issue going
back to how much it costs to get these
assets
you know there's kind of a problem with
buying and selling black bodies even in
a virtual space so you know one uh
solution maybe that could have been
proposed to this problem is always the i
mean this is very common in tech there's
always the diversity solution right it's
like we need more representation so you
know um we could have said well let's
just get more authentic images of
blackness which is what's happening now
which is why you see the single again
just the one black model with like a
really beautiful twist out and really
lovely curls so it's like let's add more
black people to the space um but i
actually don't want black bodies to
exist in that space at all because i
don't like the the logic of the platform
um
so you know thinking again about like
how do i get past my sort of default
assumptions about what could happen and
conceive of something new and hopefully
better
so i'm going to take a brief detour how
my time okay so i'm going to take a
brief detour um from my presentation
because i just want to show you some
mock-ups again this is a work in
progress i'm just showing you this is
all unreleased um but i want to talk
about the way that i'm sort of
navigating the design
process
so um for the open source afrohair
library site itself um there's different
ways that we're thinking about building
out this
database so um oh maybe this is it
one second
so
i'm really sensitive to the idea that
blackness is so often
extracted from black people
and so i thought you know in this
process so i'm collaborating with black
3d artists and that's how we're
developing the models to see the library
um i i really want to make sure that the
artist is platformed i want to make sure
that this is
a non-neutral space and that it has a
voice it has a strong voice so every
time you see a model it's always
associated with the artist of course
barry jenkins is not actually our 3d
modeler but um we always have the artist
here this would be where their artist
statement goes uh you see the series of
models that they're creating and so
again you always see that the artist is
just as important as the product i don't
want to have an again even myself and i
don't have an extractive relationship to
the artist that i work with where it's
just here's the results but you know the
artist is is laboring in the background
i want them to be highly present in the
site instead of having a search bar um
we're thinking about things like how we
can use a tagging system to filter so
instead of a user coming to the site and
saying i want to have you know a giant
lollipop afro you don't get that instead
you have to
the very process of using the site
requires you to understand and learn
the language of black hair so we're
looking at how to filter through
hairstyles
um
and you can see
sorry you can see this in our um even
the way the model page is set up um
where you would see the the type of
hairstyle so these you know this would
fall under twist or bantu knots um
that's one way that you can sort of
search for models or find models and
then the other way is by actually just
looking at the artist themselves so you
would go to the artist page and then you
would see something like this with all
of their models that you can select
through and then their artist statement
would be here and then you know
utilitarian stuff like the poly counts
and all of that would be secondary
information but again really
highlighting the artist's work and the
artist themselves
um
i want to
share a little bit about um how we're
even treating the uh the application
process
so you know i'm an academic i'm an
academic and you know i've been in fine
arts for a while so i'm used to a
certain kind of
application process and i'm one that
doesn't make me actually that
comfortable so i wanted to open up this
space to folks who aren't already um
sort of socialized in that way so i
wanted to i'm really a big fan of
creating very simple straightforward
applications and so i think this one is
three questions the first one you know
talks about our political goals and how
that aligns with with our collaborators
uh the second one asks you know if
people have afro-textured hair
themselves or an intimate understanding
of the way it moves its body
because you know we really want to put
that to the foreground but then my
favorite question
is would you under any circumstances put
raisins in the potato salad
and i think it's important to ask
questions like this this is actually
like probably the most important
question in the entire application
process because it's speaking you know
unapologetically to the fact that this
is rooted in black culture not just the
facade of it but really like being
immersed in that space and caring about
the nuances and the details and being
kind of funny
um
[Music]
so
the other thing that i want to mention
thinking back to this this idea of
refusal i'm still thinking about how
we're going to display these 3d models
um of course we're going to have a 3d
viewer where you can rotate everything
and see it in 360. but i thought you
know it would be lovely if the way that
we started
the models was actually facing away from
you so even though these are digital
objects um and this is something that's
a through line in all of my work these
representations of blackness that still
i still want to keep the humanity so
even though they're you know they're
characters i want them to feel like
people i almost want the the these
objects to have a sort of agency so as
you can see from this is the
announcement um from the first
fellowship we've got all of the
characters facing away from you which i
think is really powerful i think that
um the gesture of having to flip and
rotate that character to face you to
really see them can be a powerful one
um so these are one this is you know
just a few strategies that i'm taking um
in terms of developing just the the user
experience and the site navigation
uh
yeah okay i'm so close on time so
what i'm gonna do is i'm gonna shift
over and so you've seen some of the
models but i'm gonna show you some stuff
that we haven't uh
haven't shared with folks
and show you some of the models that
were actually created so we've only had
one um
osol fellowship so far which is the
program it's a resident it's a remote
residency for um black 3d artists
and it was really successful we had
artists from all around the world it was
incredible to be to share that space
with them and here's some of the stuff
that uh they came up with
so this is an artist uh working out of
belgium um malika matumbo
and uh
her work is really she's really
interested in
fantasy and almost the kind of these
these monstrous phantasms like her
there's something i don't want to say
creepy but transfixing actually about
this work really captivating and the
name of the series is transfiction um
because she wanted something that felt
fantasy but also
um a kind of everyday aspiration
something that was both fantastic but
but um
uh that you could actually do a way that
you could actually wear your hair
um here are a couple of other models
from her series
i just i love this work so much
here are some models uh from hd harris
uh they created the series future proof
with the idea that black drip is never
obsolete and uh black people use our
hair as technology and we'll further uh
continue to do that in the future
and so you can see it's not just about
the hair it's really about you know
coming up like
building worlds right and and building
out these futures
uh you can't see this one so well but
these are actually these holographic
whales and this whole oceanic um theme
it's really uh beautiful
and then the last one i'll show you is
from evening cicada so this artist uh
was this is from the afromythic series
so taking um mythical creatures and
tales of lore from um
uh many different cultures and then
giving them a kind of like an
afrocentric twist and i always get the
name of this wrong i think it's the aqua
akra
acrobamelu something like that it's uh
the scorpion man uh translated into this
black femme character and using these
like really beautiful poodle puffs and i
just i love this because we need more
black fantasy right
um
yeah
and this final image uh my little my
small little active refusal here for you
uh is by an artist superfuchia or
d'andra rose
and you can see more of this work
at on twitter so i have shared more
images on twitter at afrohair library or
you can follow the project by going to
afrogirllibrary.org
and that's my presentation thank you
much am
that was fantastic
it was so cool to see some of the
upcoming projects in the afro-hair
library it's such an important project
and i think you know it's really
exciting to talk to you about it you
know uh
especially you know we just spoke to law
janae mcmillan right before and she's
working on a uh they're working on a
similar project um
not so similar but you know in terms of
archiving and digitizing and preserving
and caring for black movement and dance
you know another kind of black
technology that has been appropriated um
violence had violence done to for for
centuries
um
oh
can i on that note i just
there was one point that i forgot to
mention go for it because it's fully
related so um
the way that i picture uh
this resource working is i actually want
to instead of people sort of coming to
the site um with their preconceived
notions of blackness and then just like
finding those i want it to feel like
you're opening up a vogue spread i want
it to sort of challenge and inspire
people and i also and intentionally
designing it as a rabbit hole to get
lost in so one thing i didn't show you
was this mock-up which is like you don't
just start with the models you come here
and then you see some history of black
hair you you know read an article about
the politics of black hair you get some
wonderful beautiful quotes from james
james baldwin um and then you get to the
models and then maybe you get to like a
playlist of upcoming you know artists
and musicians and things like that so um
and i and i was thinking about it when
you brought up legendary because
back to that idea of caretaking right
like how can this be a community site
like a site of education
right and knowledge building and
knowledge sharing but that one that
sort of through its design forces you to
get enmeshed
to get entangled to get lost instead of
just saying oh i'm coming here i'm
grabbing my afro and i'm throwing it in
my work and i'm leaving you know
um yeah so i think that's that's a lot
of that's where we have a lot of um
commonality between myself and majinae's
work
that's really cool to you know to hear
that to hear about that commonality and
you know that's something that i was
thinking about a lot in kind of
anticipation for
for today um but the thing that you know
you know you're talking
in talking you know you were talking
about how like this is something that
really strikes me and that i haven't
totally brought my head around yet you
know
how black bodies are bought and
purchased in seoul digitally as well and
that is such a huge problem um and you
know for instance i there's a video game
that i love to play it's called watch
dogs 2 um and you play as you play as a
black character the main character is
black he's an oakland-based hacker um
and kind of a badass and you know he's a
wonderful character but you know i i've
been you know i was taking screenshots
and screen recordings and all these
things and i was like i was you know
what does it mean for me as a white
person to be playing as this black
character like if i'm going to represent
my experience doing this like what that
you know what are the ethics around like
how to do this and at the same time as
you know this is a mass-market video
game that is you know it's a triple a
studio it's been played by hundreds of
thousands if not millions of people of
all races genders colors etc
um
and
on top and so like in building a
marketplace an opera source library
people can take assets like which is the
role that you know
i this term is kind of one that's used
in in media studies on this topic but
like racial tourism um or kind of the
appropriation and the purchasing of
these assets for people to use to embody
themselves virtually like how do you
navigate that side of this conversation
so you know
yeah i mean there's a lot there and i
have some i have a few different
thoughts but one of them is like there's
a reason why these models are not for
sale why they'll be you know free i
don't want it to be a transaction like
you give me money and i give you
blackness you know and again i don't
want to have a proprietary relationship
where i own these things and no one can
use them um or even only black people
can use them that sort of thing i've
been thinking a lot about this
and i think i'm gonna probably piss off
like a contingent of folks who are in
open source because i've really been
thinking especially as we see what's
going on with nfts
like we need some restrictions on this
openness
and i've been really trying to think
about and look toward um indigenous
peoples and like you know they've been
practicing
communal resource protection for
centuries in ways that don't impose you
know the logic of ownership
um and you know
also like black folks you know if you
come from a community that has
historically been economically and
culturally exploited you know that
it would be irresponsible to just be
completely open because in order to
sustain something for generations in
order to make sure that your culture
your knowledge all of it survives um you
have to protect it from exploitation and
eradication so you know i've kind of
there's people are asking me like when
is this this library going to come out
and right now i'm shooting for summer of
2023 but i'm glad that i've been taking
my time because another big area of this
research is thinking about the licensing
and thinking about
the ethics of access and you know coming
up with with licenses that
um
[Music]
not just anticipate the future because i
think that that there's a limitation
there but i'm i'm trying to think about
models of consent and how we should
build that into our licensing you know
should licensing be ongoing and granted
enthusiastically and revocable
so you know i
and again i don't have the answers but
like i'm
i want to be in conversation because i
think this is something we all really
have to think about that we can
how do you ensure the resource i think
about like the paradox if the paradox of
tolerance is that you know you can't
tolerate the intolerant or else
tolerance will disappear then what
happens to open source when you know
artists and developers feel that they
need to pull their stuff from public
domain and add these new restrictive
licenses because
you know they're concerned about misuse
and abuse
of what they're building and so just
being a black person i'm like we this is
it
i don't want to create another pathway
to just
having you know aaa companies or anyone
extract this blackness put in their game
and then never hire black people and
never engage with black people or black
community or never invest in black folks
in black community i also you know have
to contend with like okay well what
happens if it's just like someone uses
these beautiful models like
to create racism simulator 3000
you know which is also just like call of
duty or whatever like it's just
we already have this we already have
like brown people ship up like that
happens
um so i don't really ha again like i
don't have the answers there's just
things i'm thinking about because i
don't think you know
we shouldn't make the work we need to
build our archives but we do need to
think a little bit about like and
disentangle of gatekeeping from
caretaking caretaking and what that
looks like
it's also like a monumental
responsibility like that just i mean i
obviously you're bringing an artist but
is it mostly just you and your research
like
how like what kind of support do you
have to take this on
yeah i mean well that's the thing i'm
not doing this by myself um so even with
the mod i'm not a 3d modeler so what we
do is you know once we go through the
fellowship process um i work with
artists i talk to them we talk about
like what are like we have intimate
conversations about like our visions of
blackness and what's really nice about
um as one of our fellows pointed out and
like our like second or third meeting or
something was being in a space where
it's all black people
you can also be critical and you can
also fight and you can disagree and you
can like work out because there's not
this gaze there's not this like oh we
gotta get everything perfect because
someone hears this you know it's not
like it's like okay we're all family
like let's let's talk about like let's
talk about like what the benefits are
um to doing things in different ways um
and negotiate that
um
yeah
sorry remind me of your like i have adhd
i was just asking yeah i mean it sounds
like there is a collectiveness that's
happening but in terms of these bigger
sort of issues in in terms of like
authorship and
like
how like
working with this is why it has to be a
community project
um
and it has to be done collectively so
beyond just working with 3d artists i
mean this is also why i'm thinking about
like i like that it's global i want it
to be diasporic
um i
you know want to make sure that artists
regardless of experience or whether
they've been professionalized or whether
they've gone to you know through formal
education or whatever all have access to
the space and you know as i um continue
to scale these fellowships i really want
to work not just with folks in tech
so i don't think of this as like a tech
project i don't think of this as just
for 3d artists i also want to have
fellowships that include you know black
writers that include black hair stylists
and collaborate with folks who you know
are are working with actual black hair
because all of us really need to be part
of that conversation um this is where
i'm really inspired by um
processing foundation and just like well
you know i'm friends with lauren
mccarthy who's amazing and i adore her
and like the way that she talks about
things about contribution right that
everyone's a contributor right it's you
know whether you're giving a workshop or
you're setting something up or whether
you're adding to the code base or
whatever like
that we need everyone and so i really
love that idea um and making sure that
this is about black community and black
people primarily um regardless of sort
of technical skills
you know because there's different ways
to contribute right and so
black folks are constantly making and
remaking culture and so i want every one
of us to be part of that conversation
and also i want co-conspirators
you know to be supporting that work and
i think one of the steps that i haven't
quite figured out yet but i've been told
with because people always ask me like
okay i'm not i'm not black how do i help
and i think that
one of the ways i think
you know i want to approach that is by
having non-black folks because we i want
to provide material and communal support
for black people especially that
material part like give black people
money it's important
and for non-black folks i really like
the idea of like folks investing their
time and investing their knowledge into
the space without necessarily taking
something out of it
um so yeah those are just that's that's
how i'm thinking about it so far
wow i mean it's so complex and it's you
know something that as you said doesn't
have a definite answer right now and
we're still trying to think through what
those protocols are going to look like
and i love that you mentioned like the
licensing and you know how we can think
through alternative modes of licensing
where there's mutability involved and
you know we were talking earlier this
morning with kia koitler about daos and
the possibility for blockchain and more
transparent community decision making um
and permissions and not seeing you know
and you know as these different ideas
are kind of starting to congeal you know
i'm starting to see linkages between
like how we might be able to use
technology to write different kinds of
rules and regulations different kinds of
uh protocols that really involve all of
the members of the community in a way
that feels equitable that um is
transparent and that
you know makes it very clear where these
odd digital objects are going how
they're being used and you know what's
what's happening to them um
you know i'd love to
uh
also ask you
um
i think that
no let me back this up a little bit i
mean this is this
the
way that you're thinking through
representation in virtual space is
really profound um and i think that's
something that's represented through all
of your works whether it's yay or nay
and the way that you're thinking through
language and you know and pop culture
and and and this psionics all of this
kind of entwined um and works like
fairly intelligent tech and um the work
that you're showing as part of the great
area festival exhibition with the
snapchat filters um
you know i want to go back to this idea
of agency and that you were discussing
before and how you want these objects to
have agency um what you know what ways
you know maybe this is maybe it's easier
to illustrate through some of your works
but how do you know do you approach this
idea of reclaiming your agency in
virtual space um and by like presenting
yourself presenting other people um in
ways that is that combats the extractive
exploitative you know aspects of the
algorithm systems that they're embedded
in
god this is like asking me about like
how i approach my whole existence
because like that's the thing i'm trying
to figure out no but really like when
people ask me like what's the motivation
for your work what are you i'm like i'm
just trying to get free
honestly and like for years and years
and years it was just that i was just
like i just like i feel caged by so many
things
um and i just want to be free like
that's what i want that's the only thing
i want like before i die is to get free
and then you know initially because i
come from a very impoverished background
you know i'm a first generation college
student i'm a non-traditional student i
didn't
i didn't have access to like the kind
like the kind of knowledge that i i
profess you know in classes and teaching
and things like this until i was like 25
that's when i went into undergrad so for
me it was like this huge cultural shift
and and for so many years i was just
worried about survival like so that was
the freedom it really was like okay well
you're hitting a wall you're hitting an
economic wall you're hitting a social
wall you're not allowed to be in certain
neighborhoods certain spaces people
don't respect you people don't see you
right and then as i went to ucla and i
went to grad school tonight and you know
there's other kinds of issues that
happen in these more privileged spaces
like oh well now i'm in the space of
privilege but it wasn't made for me and
my like wide hips don't fit in this like
thing that was made for these skinny
white dudes like it's not it's not
happening for me like i gotta figure
this out um and then as i kept going and
continue to be like dissatisfied in
different ways and encounter new
barriers you know it was like first
shaking off the external then realizing
i had to confront the internalized
barriers okay
and then finally finally i think getting
to this space in my practice where i'm
like oh
i'm never going to get free unless we're
all free right so that idea of
collective liberation on one hand and
then liberatory praxis is like my new
thing i'm like
pre-2016
i'm sure lots of people have a similar
experience whether they're artists or
not i was really doing a lot of work
that felt like i was like
suffering for the end goal like i'm
gonna finally i'm gonna make that hard
difficult feminist work that's
anti-racist and i'm gonna convince some
let's be real some white people that i'm
a person and it's gonna make it it's
gonna be worth it even though it sucks
and it's so hard and i'm suffering and
then like the election happened i was
like oh well that's never gonna work
i'll be dead by then so
it made me rethink my practice so that i
had to do work that in and of itself
was the end that liberated me through
the process and that's why i love art
show because it was so much fun to make
and it's not pretentious and it's silly
and their parts that are so
cringe-worthy in that work like the end
i can almost never watch the end and i'm
like but i love that i did it because it
was that feeling of you know i can put
my boobs on the internet and they can be
there could be soap opera music in the
background they can have dog ears and
like that worked us so much for me in
terms of
i mean i've talked about this but like
um i've talked about you know i
was in an abusive relationship and one
of the things that that person had told
me was like you know never put your
boobs on the internet if you don't want
to be judged or criticized you know this
very idea of respectability and i was
like oh well i did that great or you
know um
thinking about like what it means to
have a couple of degrees now and be like
a fancy respectable black person like i
don't want to be a respectable person of
any kind like so no i'm going to do the
silly work so i think for me
what it means to like reclaim my agency
is honestly really sitting with the
things that i'm afraid of and then
trying to find out where they where they
come from and like this is my
i like to think and i hope people feel
this way i think that my work is
political
without being preachy
because i'm never coming from an
outsider's perspective anything that i'm
doing i'm always coming from something
that started within me
some critique that i felt or some
critique that i was responding to some
cage that maybe i built for myself
because i had you know felt these
pressures or thought i needed to contort
myself in a certain way and i really sit
with those feelings and then i try to
find out whether i want to root them out
and then i make the work to sort of
solve it to get it out of me and i hope
that that creates like kind of a model
for folks who are feeling similar ways
to go okay that's how we can do this
um
yeah hope that answers your question but
i'm still working it out
i mean i did you know not
to use my favorite wanky art term that
i love to use in moments like this it's
a continual process of becoming
you know it's something that is
constantly emerging out of itself that
you constantly have to battle with
um and
it's i think it's hard you know and i
think that you know not to like not to
like you know contradict or like you
know drill down deeper but you know
something that
is the you know the classic
institutional critique is how can you
fix something from the inside like how
can you participate in something and
then also
you know
seek to make changes to it
simultaneously and like that's something
that i've been wrestling with
so heavily just in the terms of you know
like social media like i don't want to
support facebook i don't want to support
instagram but that's where the artist
that i support and i work with are
that's how i get the word out about them
this is how i do you know this is how i
use this to do good work but i am still
a part of the problem by giving that
platform credence and i'm you know i'm
wondering how
you know
you know especially you know in
considering how like you know you put
out this library these assets then
become you know uh you know supposedly
available to say a triple gaa game
studio to not pay a black person to do
that
to to to you know to do that work um and
how do you how do you deal with that
tension kind of with all of this i know
that's kind of a tough question but you
know it's something i've still been
wrestling with
yeah i mean i think i've always been a
fan of diversity of tactics like
i mean i've always always been like i'm
like a survivor so i will use whatever
resources are at my disposal and i and i
have no like i don't feel any shame or
guilt about that
because i'm like i just
i mean i hear you i'm like okay well how
do you because i also use these kind of
like platforms and i think
okay this is also going to be corny but
it's like when you know better you do
better
and
you should just be thoughtful about
whatever resources you have the kind of
work that i was making you know
six years ago is different than the work
that i'm making now because i was in a
different place and i knew different
things you know my work was much more
focused on my own individual like
experience and it seemed like a good
thing if i had a success but now i think
a lot more in terms of community but
that's also related to the fact that i
have more privilege and access it's a
lot easier to do that because i have a
stable i get to go to therapy you know
every two weeks i get to uh live in a
place that's stable that i don't have a
weird shitty landlord who's also like
you know
uh trying to assault me you know like i
have a kind of stability in life and so
i think that
and i also have all sorts of guilt and
shame over that because as someone who
came up like with nothing it's like
really hard to be like wait i'm allowed
a luxury oh god what am i what am i
doing you know people like i deal with
all of that but then i i don't know
something happened to me and i just sort
of
decided that the best thing that i could
do is
focus on what i'm good at and that you
know i have a weird relationship to both
shame and pride i think both of them i
experience them but i don't think either
of them are helpful
so for me i just try to focus on like
what can i do and this is why with osol
it's not just about working with black
artists like a big part of this is like
where can i get grant money to just give
money to black people like it's as
simple as that
and i think that those mature like
addressing you know the material
conditions we're giving black artists
the time and space and the money to be
able to
conjure their own images of blackness
that if they're working for another
company or a company at all that they
may not be paid to do because no one's
necessarily looking to find these
beautiful depictions no one's looking to
fund these things so just giving folks
the space and the time in the community
um and i also think you know it's not on
me to solve all these damn problems
it's not on any one of us to solve these
problems like i didn't start this system
like it doesn't mean i don't have a
responsibility it just means that i
don't need to sort of beat myself up for
not
even doing all of the right things
because the right thing to do is to open
up the conversation and to talk with
other people so that we get better and
better together
like i
i appreciate working with others because
i appreciate the dialogue and i'm not a
person who sort of shirks away from
criticism i love that because i think of
it as an opportunity to get better and
do better so that's where i'm starting
and i when i hear other people who have
different ideas or even more radical
ideas like if somebody's like you know
what
i'm like can i curse screw all this
let's burn the system down let's burn
everything down like
i'm also for that i'm like i don't know
how to do that so i'm just gonna be over
here making my little art but when the
revolution comes like okay what do you
need like i'm like i'm not trying to get
in anybody else's way
you know i
i don't know i don't think that they're
they're they're not mutually exclusive
like i think all everyone should do
what they do best do it thoughtfully i
think we do need a caretaking ethic i
think we need to be in community and i
think that we need to
um
be really listening to each other's
needs and i hope i'm not causing any
harm but that's about where i'm at and
maybe in 10 years i'll be somewhere else
and i look forward to that too but this
is what i know how to do now
well you know what i'm going to be like
tuned in with my face glued to the
screen in 10 years like wanting to
keep up with you know what the next
evolution is um we're sadly out of time
but am this was
so amazing um and the work and the way
you you know the your approach to
dealing with all of these things in such
a thoughtful um and firm way is
so
wonderful just to and and so instructive
and i you know i want to remind
everybody in the audience to give money
to black people you know
one last time
let's let's drive it are you on facebook
give some money to black people using
give some money to black people tweet it
today
give some money to black people there
you go totally 100 well keep us posted
on the progress of the open source
african open source apple hair library
um and let us know you know what we can
do a great area and everywhere else to
anywhere else to to support um i'm
excited to see kinds of the creations
that come out of giving people access to
these unbelievable amazing and rich
resources
so thank you so so much for being here
and check out am's work our show um in
the gray area festival exhibitions
i will drop the link
thank you